[#5472] improvement(docs): Add example to use cloud stroage fileset and polish hadoop-catalog document. (#6059)
apache/gravitino: docs/hadoop-catalog-with-gcs.md

                                            comment="This is an example fileset",
                                            storage_location="gs://bucket/root/schema/example_fileset",
                                            properties={"k1": "v1"})
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Using Spark to access the fileset

The following code snippet shows how to use **PySpark 3.1.3 with Hadoop environment(Hadoop 3.2.0)** to access the fileset:

```python
import logging
from gravitino import NameIdentifier, GravitinoClient, Catalog, Fileset, GravitinoAdminClient
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession
import os

gravitino_url = "http://localhost:8090"
metalake_name = "test"

catalog_name = "your_gcs_catalog"
schema_name = "your_gcs_schema"
fileset_name = "your_gcs_fileset"

os.environ["PYSPARK_SUBMIT_ARGS"] = "--jars /path/to/gravitino-gcp-{gravitino-version}.jar,/path/to/gravitino-filesystem-hadoop3-runtime-{gravitino-version}.jar,/path/to/gcs-connector-hadoop3-2.2.22-shaded.jar --master local[1] pyspark-shell"
spark = SparkSession.builder
.appName("gcs_fielset_test")
.config("spark.hadoop.fs.AbstractFileSystem.gvfs.impl", "org.apache.gravitino.filesystem.hadoop.Gvfs")

> .config("spark.hadoop.fs.gvfs.impl", "org.apache.gravitino.filesystem.hadoop.GravitinoVirtualFileSystem")

Reviewer: I think it can be simplified, I open #6130  to track this

Path filesetPath = new Path("gvfs://fileset/test_catalog/test_schema/test_fileset/new_dir");
FileSystem fs = filesetPath.getFileSystem(conf);
fs.mkdirs(filesetPath);
...
```

## Using fileset with hadoop fs command

The following are examples of how to use the `hadoop fs` command to access the fileset in Hadoop 3.1.3.

1. Adding the following contents to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/etc/hadoop/core-site.xml` file:

```xml
  <property>
    <name>fs.AbstractFileSystem.gvfs.impl</name>
    <value>org.apache.gravitino.filesystem.hadoop.Gvfs</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>fs.gvfs.impl</name>
    <value>org.apache.gravitino.filesystem.hadoop.GravitinoVirtualFileSystem</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>fs.gravitino.server.uri</name>
    <value>http://192.168.50.188:8090</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>fs.gravitino.client.metalake</name>
    <value>test</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>gcs-service-account-file</name>
    <value>/path/your-service-account-file.json</value>
  </property>
```

2. Copy the necessary jars to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/common/lib` directory.

> Copy the corresponding jars to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/common/lib` directory. For GCS, you need to copy `gravitino-gcp-{version}.jar` to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/common/lib` directory.

Author: Ok, I will optimize it.

then copy `hadoop-gcp-${version}.jar` and related dependencies to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/tools/lib/` directory. Those jars can be found in the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/tools/lib/` directory, for simple you can add all the jars in the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/tools/lib/` directory to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/common/lib` directory.

3. Run the following command to access the fileset:

```shell
hadoop dfs -ls gvfs://fileset/gcs_catalog/schema/example
hadoop dfs -put /path/to/local/file gvfs://fileset/gcs_catalog/schema/example
```

> ## Using Gravitino virtual file system Python client

Author: What I means is `Using Gravitino virtual file system Python client to access fileset`.

---
title: "Hadoop catalog with GCS"
slug: /hadoop-catalog-with-gcs
date: 2024-01-03
keyword: Hadoop catalog GCS
license: "This software is licensed under the Apache License version 2."
---

This document describes how to configure a Hadoop catalog with GCS.

## Prerequisites

In order to create a Hadoop catalog with GCS, you need to place [`gravitino-gcp-bundle-${gravitino-version}.jar`](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.apache.gravitino/gravitino-gcp-bundle) in Gravitino Hadoop classpath located
at `${HADOOP_HOME}/share/hadoop/common/lib/`. After that, start Gravitino server with the following command:

```bash
$ bin/gravitino-server.sh start
```

> ## Create a Hadoop Catalog with GCS in Gravitino

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Create a Hadoop Catalog with GCS
```

The rest of this document shows how to use the Hadoop catalog with GCS in Gravitino with a full example.

> ### Catalog a catalog

Reviewer 2: ？

| `default-filesystem-provider` | The name default filesystem providers of this Hadoop catalog if users do not specify the scheme in the URI. Default value is `builtin-local`, for GCS, if we set this value, we can omit the prefix 'gs://' in the location. | `builtin-local` | No                         | 0.7.0-incubating |
| `gcs-service-account-file`    | The path of GCS service account JSON file.                                                                                                                                                                                   | (none)          | Yes if it's a GCS fileset. | 0.7.0-incubating |

### Create a schema

Refer to [Schema operation](./manage-fileset-metadata-using-gravitino.md#schema-operations) for more details.

### Create a fileset

Refer to [Fileset operation](./manage-fileset-metadata-using-gravitino.md#fileset-operations) for more details.

## Using Hadoop catalog with GCS

> ### Create a Hadoop catalog/schema/file set with GCS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Create a Hadoop catalog/schema/fileset with GCS
```

<Tabs groupId="language" queryString>
<TabItem value="shell" label="Shell">

```shell
curl -X POST -H "Accept: application/vnd.gravitino.v1+json" \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{
  "name": "test_catalog",
  "type": "FILESET",
  "comment": "This is a GCS fileset catalog",
  "provider": "hadoop",
  "properties": {
    "location": "gs://bucket/root",
    "gcs-service-account-file": "path_of_gcs_service_account_file",
    "filesystem-providers": "gcs"
  }
}' http://localhost:8090/api/metalakes/metalake/catalogs
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="java" label="Java">

```java
GravitinoClient gravitinoClient = GravitinoClient
    .builder("http://localhost:8090")
    .withMetalake("metalake")
    .build();

gcsProperties = ImmutableMap.<String, String>builder()
    .put("location", "gs://bucket/root")
    .put("gcs-service-account-file", "path_of_gcs_service_account_file")
    .put("filesystem-providers", "gcs")
    .build();

Catalog gcsCatalog = gravitinoClient.createCatalog("test_catalog",
    Type.FILESET,
    "hadoop", // provider, Gravitino only supports "hadoop" for now.
    "This is a GCS fileset catalog",

>     gcsProperties);

Reviewer 3: I think you should fix the indention, either 4 spaces or 2 spaces?

Author: I have used 4 spaces as the indentation for all Java examples.

```python
## Replace the following code snippet with the above code snippet with the same environment variables

os.environ["PYSPARK_SUBMIT_ARGS"] = "--jars /path/to/gravitino-gcp-bundle-{gravitino-version}.jar,/path/to/gravitino-filesystem-hadoop3-runtime-{gravitino-version}.jar, --master local[1] pyspark-shell"
```

- [`gravitino-gcp-bundle-${gravitino-version}.jar`](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.apache.gravitino/gravitino-gcp-bundle) is the Gravitino GCP jar with Hadoop environment(3.3.1) and `gcs-connector`.
- [`gravitino-gcp-${gravitino-version}.jar`](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.apache.gravitino/gravitino-gcp) is a condensed version of the Gravitino GCP bundle jar without Hadoop environment and [`gcs-connector`](https://github.com/GoogleCloudDataproc/hadoop-connectors/releases/download/v2.2.22/gcs-connector-hadoop3-2.2.22-shaded.jar) 

Please choose the correct jar according to your environment.

:::note
In some Spark versions, a Hadoop environment is needed by the driver, adding the bundle jars with '--jars' may not work. If this is the case, you should add the jars to the spark CLASSPATH directly.
:::

> ### Accessing a fileset using the Hadoop fs command

Reviewer: dfs?

1. Adding the following contents to the `${HADOOP_HOME}/etc/hadoop/core-site.xml` file:

```xml
  <property>
    <name>fs.AbstractFileSystem.gvfs.impl</name>
    <value>org.apache.gravitino.filesystem.hadoop.Gvfs</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>fs.gvfs.impl</name>
    <value>org.apache.gravitino.filesystem.hadoop.GravitinoVirtualFileSystem</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>fs.gravitino.server.uri</name>
    <value>http://localhost:8090</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>fs.gravitino.client.metalake</name>
    <value>test</value>
  </property>

  <property>
    <name>gcs-service-account-file</name>
    <value>/path/your-service-account-file.json</value>
  </property>
```

2. Add the necessary jars to the Hadoop classpath.

For GCS, you need to add `gravitino-filesystem-hadoop3-runtime-${gravitino-version}.jar`, `gravitino-gcp-${gravitino-version}.jar` and [`gcs-connector-hadoop3-2.2.22-shaded.jar`](https://github.com/GoogleCloudDataproc/hadoop-connectors/releases/download/v2.2.22/gcs-connector-hadoop3-2.2.22-shaded.jar) to Hadoop classpath.

3. Run the following command to access the fileset:

```shell

> hadoop dfs -ls gvfs://fileset/gcs_catalog/gcs_schema/gcs_example

Reviewer: better to `./${HADOOP_HOME}/bin/hadoop dfs ls ......`

Author: I just copied it from the file `how-to-use-gvfs.md`. If it's not too accurate, I 'll make changes.

    .builder("http://localhost:8090")
    .withMetalake("metalake")
    .build();

Map<String, String> gcsProperties = ImmutableMap.<String, String>builder()
    .put("location", "gs://bucket/root")
    .put("gcs-service-account-file", "path_of_gcs_service_account_file")
    .put("filesystem-providers", "gcs")
    .build();

Catalog gcsCatalog = gravitinoClient.createCatalog("test_catalog", 
    Type.FILESET,
    "hadoop", // provider, Gravitino only supports "hadoop" for now.
    "This is a GCS fileset catalog",
    gcsProperties);
// ...

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="python" label="Python">

```python
gravitino_client: GravitinoClient = GravitinoClient(uri="http://localhost:8090", metalake_name="metalake")
gcs_properties = {
    "location": "gs://bucket/root",
    "gcs-service-account-file": "path_of_gcs_service_account_file",
    "filesystem-providers": "gcs"
}

gcs_properties = gravitino_client.create_catalog(name="test_catalog",
                                             type=Catalog.Type.FILESET,
                                             provider="hadoop",
                                             comment="This is a GCS fileset catalog",

>                                              properties=gcs_properties)

Reviewer 3: Also here.
